CSS for CWV blog post (#5396)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/blog/css-web-vitals/index.md

---
title: CSS for Web Vitals
subhead: CSS-related techniques for optimizing Web Vitals
authors:
  - katiehempenius
  - una

> date: 2020-05-19

Reviewer: ```suggestion
date: 2021-05-19
```

> date: 2021-05-19

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
date: 2021-05-26
```

Reviewer 2: Updating to tomorrow's date

hero: image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/uq7JQlKJo7KBETXnVuTf.jpg
alt: Multi-colored gradient

description:
  This article covers CSS-related techniques for optimizing Web Vitals.
tags:
  - blog # blog is a required tag for the article to show up in the blog.
  - performance
  - css
---

The way you write your styles and build layouts can have a major impact on [Core

> Web Vitals.](https://web.dev/learn-web-vitals) This is particularly true for

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Web Vitals.](/learn-web-vitals) This is particularly true for
```

> 
> The way you write your styles and build layouts can have a major impact on [Core
> Web Vitals.](/learn-web-vitals) This is particularly true for
> [Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS)](/cls) and [Largest Contentful
> Paint (LCP)](/lcp). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The way you write your styles and build layouts can have a major impact on [Core
Web Vitals](/learn-web-vitals). This is particularly true for
[Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS)](/cls) and [Largest Contentful
Paint (LCP)](/lcp). 
```

> [Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS)](https://web.dev/cls) and [Largest Contentful
> Paint (LCP)](https://web.dev/lcp). 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
[Cumulative Layout Shift (CLS)](/cls) and [Largest Contentful
Paint (LCP)](/lcp). 
```

This article covers CSS-related techniques for optimizing Web Vitals. These
optimizations are broken down by different aspects of a page: layout, images,
fonts, animations, and loading. Along the way, we'll explore improving an
[example page](https://codepen.io/una/pen/vYyLKvY):

{% Img
  src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/pgmpMOmweK7BVBsVkQ5g.png",
  alt="Screenshot of example site",
  width="800",
  height="646"
%}

## Layout

### Inserting content into the DOM

> Inserting content into a page after the surrounding content has already loaded
> pushes everything else on the page down. This causes [layout
> shifts](https://web.dev/cls/#layout-shifts-in-detail).
> 
> [Cookie notices](https://web.dev/cookie-notice-best-practices/), particularly
> those placed at the top of the page, are a common example of this problem. Other
> page elements that often cause this type of layout shift when they load include
> ads and embeds.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Inserting content into a page after the surrounding content has already loaded
pushes everything else on the page down. This causes [layout
shifts](/cls/#layout-shifts-in-detail).

[Cookie notices](/cookie-notice-best-practices/), particularly
those placed at the top of the page, are a common example of this problem. Other
page elements that often cause this type of layout shift when they load include
ads and embeds.
```

#### Identify

The Lighthouse "Avoid large layout shifts" audit identifies page elements that
have shifted. For this demo, the results look like this:

{% Img
    src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/jaHtgwzDXCjx3vAFOO33.png",
    alt="Lighthouse's 'Avoid large layout shifts' audit",
    width="800",
    height="500"
%}

The cookie notice is not listed in these findings because the cookie notice

> itself isn't shifting when it loads—rather, it causes the items below it on the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
itself isn't shifting when it loads. Rather, it causes the items below it on the
```

page (that is, `div.hero` and `article`) to shift. For more information on
identifying and fixing layout shifts, see [Debugging Layout

> Shifts](https://web.dev/debugging-layout-shifts).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Shifts](/debugging-layout-shifts).
```

{% Aside %}

Lighthouse only analyzes a page's performance up until the "page load" event.
Cookie banners, ads, and other widgets sometimes do not load until after page
load. These layout shifts still affect users—even if they are not flagged by
Lighthouse.

{% endAside %}

#### Fix

Place the cookie notice at the bottom of the page using absolute or fixed
positioning.

{% Img
    src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/YBYLT9jJ9AXrbsaRNVoa.png",
    alt="Cookie notice displayed at bottom of page",
    width="800",
    height="656"
%}

Before:

```css
.banner {
  position: sticky;
  top: 0;
}
```

After:

```css
.banner {
  position: fixed;
  bottom: 0;
}
```

Another way to fix this layout shift would be to reserve space for the cookie
notice at the top of the screen. This approach is equally effective. For more
information, see [Cookie notice best

> practices](https://web.dev/cookie-notice-best-practices/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
practices](/cookie-notice-best-practices/).
```

{% Aside %}

The cookie notice is one of multiple page elements that are triggering layout
shifts when it loads. To help us get a closer look at these page elements,
subsequent demo steps will not include the cookie notice.

{% endAside %}

## Images

> ### Images & Largest Contentful Paint (LCP)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Images and Largest Contentful Paint (LCP)
```

Images are commonly the Largest Contentful Paint (LCP) element on a page. Other
[page elements that can be the LCP

> element](https://web.dev/lcp/#what-elements-are-considered) include text blocks

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
element](/lcp/#what-elements-are-considered) include text blocks
```

and video poster images. The time at which the LCP element loads determines LCP.

It's important to note that a page's LCP element can vary from page load to page
load depending on the content that is visible to the user when the page is first
displayed. For example, in this demo, the background of the cookie notice, the
hero image, and the article text are some of the potential LCP elements.

{% Img
    src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/bMoAoohyLOgTqV6B7lHr.png",
    alt="Diagram highlighting the page's LCP element in different scenarios.",
    width="800",
    height="498"
%}

In the example site, the background image of the cookie notice is actually a
large image. To improve LCP, you could instead paint the gradient in CSS, rather
than load an image to create the effect.

#### Fix

> Change the `.banner` CSS to use gradient rather than an image:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Change the `.banner` CSS to use a CSS gradient rather than an image:
```

Before:

```css
background: url("https://cdn.pixabay.com/photo/2015/07/15/06/14/gradient-845701\_960\_720.jpg")
```

After:

```css
background: linear-gradient(135deg, #fbc6ff 20%, #bdfff9 90%);
```

### Images and layout shifts

Browsers can only determine the size of an image once the image loads. If the
image load occurs after the page has been rendered, but no space has been
reserved for the image, a layout shift occurs when the image appears. In the
demo, the hero image is causing a layout shift when it loads.

{% Aside %}

> The phenomenon of images causing layout shifts is typically more apparent in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The phenomenon of images causing layout shifts is more obvious in
```

#### Fix

Set the `width` and `height` attributes on these images to avoid layout shifts.

Before:

```html
<img src="https://source.unsplash.com/random/2000x600" alt="image to load in">
<img src="https://source.unsplash.com/random/800x600" alt="image to load in">
```

After:

```html
<img src="https://source.unsplash.com/random/2000x600" width="2000" height="600" alt="image to load in">
<img src="https://source.unsplash.com/random/800x600" width="800" height="600" alt="image to load in">
```

<figure class="w-figure">
  {% Video src="video/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/fLUscMGOlGhKnNHef2py.mp4" %}
  <figcaption class="w-figcaption">
    The hero image now loads without causing a layout shift.
  </figcaption>
</figure>

{% Aside %}
Another approach to loading images is to use the
[`srcset`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTMLImageElement/srcset)
and
[`sizes`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/HTMLImageElement/sizes)
attributes in conjunction with specifying `width` and `height` attributes. This
has the additional performance advantage of allowing you to serve different
sized images to different devices. For more information, see [Serve responsive

> images](https://web.dev/serve-responsive-images/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
images](/serve-responsive-images/).
```

{% endAside %}

## Fonts

Fonts can delay text rendering and cause layout shifts. As a result, it is
important to deliver fonts quickly.

### Delayed text rendering

By default, a browser will not immediately render a text element if its

> associated web fonts have not loaded yet. This is done to prevent a ["flash of
> unstyled text (FOUT)"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flash_of_unstyled_content).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
associated web fonts have not loaded yet. This is done to prevent a ["flash of
unstyled text" (FOUT)](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flash_of_unstyled_content).
```

In many situations, this delays [First Contentful Paint

> (FCP)](http://web.dev/fcp). In some situations, this delays Largest Contentful

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
(FCP)](/fcp). In some situations, this delays Largest Contentful
```

To see the fonts that are being loaded on a particular page, open the
**Network** tab in DevTools and filter by **Font**. Fonts can be large files, so
only using fewer fonts is generally better for performance.

{% Img
    src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/Ts38bQtR6x0SDgufA9vz.png",
    alt="Screenshot of a font displayed in DevTools",
    width="800",
    height="252"
%}

To see how long it takes for the font to be requested, click on the **Timing**
tab. The sooner that a font is requested, the sooner it can be loaded and used.

{% Img
  src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/wfS7qVThKMkGA7SHd439.png",
  alt="Screenshot of 'Timing' tab in DevTools",
  width="800",
  height="340"
%}

To see the request chain for a font, click on the  **Initiator** tab.
Generally speaking, the shorter the request chain, the sooner the font can be
requested.

{% Img
  src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/0tau1GQnZfj5vPhzwnIQ.png",
  alt="Screenshot of 'Initiator' tab in DevTools",
  width="800",
  height="189"
%}

#### Fix

This demo uses the Google Fonts API. Google Fonts provides the option to load
fonts via `<link>` tags or an `@import` statement. The `<link>` code snippet

> includes a `preconnect` resource hint and therefore will likely result in faster

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
includes a `preconnect` resource hint. this should result in faster
```

> stylesheet delivery than using `@import` version. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
stylesheet delivery than using the `@import` version. 
```

At a very high-level, you can think of [resource

> hints](https://www.w3.org/TR/resource-hints/#resource-hints) as a way to "hint"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
hints](https://www.w3.org/TR/resource-hints/#resource-hints) as a way to hint
```

to the browser that it will need to set up a particular connection or download a
particular resource. As a result, the browser will prioritize these actions.
When using resource hints, keep in mind that prioritizing a particular action
takes away browser resources from other actions. Thus, resource hints should be
used thoughtfully and not for everything. For more information, see [Establish
network connections early to improve perceived page

> speed](https://web.dev/preconnect-and-dns-prefetch/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
speed](/preconnect-and-dns-prefetch/).
```

Remove the following `@import` statement from your stylesheet:

```css
@import url('https://fonts.googleapis.com/css2?family=Montserrat:wght@400&family=Roboto:wght@300&display=swap');
```

Add the following `<link>` tags to the `<head>` of the document:

```html
<link rel="preconnect" href="https://fonts.gstatic.com">
<link href="https://fonts.googleapis.com/css2?family=Roboto:wght@100&display=swap" rel="stylesheet">
```

These link tags instruct the browser to establish an early connection to
`https://fonts.gstatic.com`, and to prioritize loading the stylesheet that
contains the font declaration for Montserrat and Roboto. These `<link>` tags
should be placed as early in the `<head>` as possible.

{% Aside %}

To only load a subset of a font from Google Fonts, add the
[`?text=`](https://developers.google.com/fonts/docs/getting_started) API
parameter. For example, `?text=ABC` loads only the characters necessary to
render "ABC". This is a good way to reduce the file size of a font.

{% endAside %}

## Animations

> The primary way that animations affect Web Vitals is when they cause layout
> shifts. There are two types of animations that you should avoid using:
> [animations that trigger layout](https://web.dev/animations-guide/#triggers) and
> "animation-like" effects that move page elements. Typically these animations can
> be replaced with more performant equivalents by using CSS properties like
> [`transform`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform),
> [`opacity`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity), and
> [`filter`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/filter). For more
> information, see [How to create high-performance CSS
> animations](https://web.dev/animations/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The primary way that animations affect Web Vitals is when they cause layout
shifts. There are two types of animations that you should avoid using:
[animations that trigger layout](/animations-guide/#triggers) and
"animation-like" effects that move page elements. Typically these animations can
be replaced with more performant equivalents by using CSS properties like
[`transform`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/transform),
[`opacity`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/opacity), and
[`filter`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/filter). For more
information, see [How to create high-performance CSS
animations](/animations/).
```

### Identify

The Lighthouse "Avoid non-composited animations" audit may be helpful for
identifying non-performant animations.

{% Img
    src="image/j2RDdG43oidUy6AL6LovThjeX9c2/mXgypW9x3qgvmWDLbIZx.png",
    alt="Lighthouse's 'Avoid non-composited animations' audit",
    width="512",
    height="132"
%}

{% Aside 'caution' %}

The Lighthouse "Avoid non-composited animations" audit only identifies
non-performant _CSS animations_; JavaScript-driven animations (for example,
using
[`setInterval()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/WindowOrWorkerGlobalScope/setInterval)
to "animate" an element) are bad for performance but will not be flagged by this
audit.

{% endAside %}

### Fix

Change the `slideIn` animation sequence to use `transform: translateX()` rather
than transitioning the`margin-left` property.

Before:

```css
.header {
  animation: slideIn 1s 1 ease;
}

@keyframes slideIn {
  from {
    margin-left: -100%;
  }
  to {
    margin-left: 0;
  }
}
```

After:

```css
.header {
  animation: slideIn 1s 1 ease;
}

@keyframes slideIn {
  from {
    transform: translateX(-100%);
  }

  to {
    transform: translateX(0);
  }
}
```

## Critical CSS

> Stylesheets are render-blocking. This means that the browser encounters a
> stylesheet, it will stop downloading other resources until the browser has
> downloaded and parsed the stylesheet. This may delay LCP. To improve
> performance, consider [removing unused
> CSS](https://css-tricks.com/how-do-you-remove-unused-css-from-a-site/),
> [inlining critical CSS](https://web.dev/extract-critical-css/), and [deferring
> non-critical CSS](https://web.dev/defer-non-critical-css/#optimize).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Stylesheets are render-blocking. This means that the browser encounters a
stylesheet, it will stop downloading other resources until the browser has
downloaded and parsed the stylesheet. This may delay LCP. To improve
performance, consider [removing unused
CSS](https://css-tricks.com/how-do-you-remove-unused-css-from-a-site/),
[inlining critical CSS](/extract-critical-css/), and [deferring
non-critical CSS](/defer-non-critical-css/#optimize).
```

## Conclusion

> Although there is still room for further improvements (for example, using [image
> compression](https://web.dev/use-imagemin-to-compress-images/) to deliver images
> more quickly), these changes have significantly improved the Web Vitals of this
> site. If this were a real site, the next step would be to [collect performance
> data from real
> users](https://web.dev/vitals-measurement-getting-started/#measuring-web-vitals-using-rum-data)
> to assess whether it is [meeting the Web Vitals thresholds for most
> users](https://web.dev/vitals-measurement-getting-started/#data-interpretation).
> For more information about Web Vitals, see [Learn Web
> Vitals](https://web.dev/learn-web-vitals).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Although there is still room for further improvements (for example, using [image
compression](/use-imagemin-to-compress-images/) to deliver images
more quickly), these changes have significantly improved the Web Vitals of this
site. If this were a real site, the next step would be to [collect performance
data from real
users](/vitals-measurement-getting-started/#measuring-web-vitals-using-rum-data)
to assess whether it is [meeting the Web Vitals thresholds for most
users](/vitals-measurement-getting-started/#data-interpretation).
For more information about Web Vitals, see [Learn Web
Vitals](/learn-web-vitals).
```
